-DOCSTART-
The latest chemical to cause concern at the Intercontinental Terminals Co. facility in Deer Park is benzene, which was detected at elevated levels early Thursday morning and prompted shelter-in-place alerts.
The benzene release comes after a massive fire burned through the tank farm for three days and created a miles-long plume of smoke visible throughout the Houston area. The fire was extinguished Wednesday, but officials previously warned of the possibility of other chemical exposure in the area.
Fire officials said benzene leaked out from a foam blanket smothering the tank farm in Deer Park. ITC officials added that the benzene levels "are below those that represent an immediate risk." Cities were advised to shelter in place as a precaution, officials said.
According to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Benzene is made mostly from petroleum and is used to make Styrofoam, synthetic fibers, rubbers and pesticides, among other substances.
Risks of benzene exposure fluctuates depending on the concentration. Short-term health effects of concentrated exposure include dizziness, nausea, headaches, drowsiness, tremors and loss of consciousness, according to a report from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
Continuing exposure can lead to "permanent suppression of bone marrow functioning so that few new blood cells are formed, a condition known as aplastic anemia," the report said.
Other chemicals that burned in the fire include Naphtha and Xylene, two components used in gasoline. The fire eventually spread to more tanks, one of which was storing Toluene, a chemical used in nail polish remover, glues and paint thinner.
The fire affected up to eight tanks at one time. While air quality levels were listed as "good" or "moderate" in the Houston area for much of the fire, health officials warn of side effects from exposure to these chemicals.
DEER PARK PLANT FIRE: Officials say it could last for days
Naphtha can irritate the nose and throat when breathed, and poisonous gases are produced when naphtha is exposed to fire, according to earlier reports in the Houston Chronicle.
Luke Metzger, executive director of the environmental advocacy group Environment Texas, previously told the Chronicle that Naphtha can cause headaches, dizziness nausea and vomiting in the short term. Long-term side effects include risk of cancer and risk to the nervous system, he said.
Xylene exposure produces similar side effects, including including headaches, dizziness, confusion and change in one's sense of balance, according to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease registry.
Exposure to Xylene at very high levels can cause unconsciousness and, in some cases, death, according to the registry.
Toluene's short-term side effects also include confusion, headaches and dizziness. Weakness, memory loss and nausea can also occur,  according to the U.S. National Library of Medicine. 
In the long-term, Toluene can cause brain damage, as well as damage to the kidneys and liver. Read more about the side effects here.
-DOCSTART-
NASHVILLE, TENN. — A burst dike at a coal-fired power plant in eastern Tennessee spilled millions more cubic yards of ash than originally estimated, officials said Friday, and residents fear the muck coating their neighborhood is endangering the drinking water.
The state, however, said Friday that tests show water entering the treatment plant is safe.
About 5.4 million cubic yards of coal fly ash, a byproduct of burning coal, broke out of a retention pond at the Kingston Fossil Plant, Tennessee Valley Authority spokesman John Moulton said.
The TVA, the nation's largest utility company supplying electricity to 8.8 million people, first estimated Monday's breach had spilled less than half that amount. Moulton could not explain the discrepancy. The spill damaged 12 homes and covered 300 acres with sludge in Harriman, 35 miles west of Knoxville.
"We are cleaning it up," he said. "That's where our efforts are focused, and we are making some headway."
Residents were stunned by the new numbers.
"That's scary, to know that they can be off by that much," said Angela Spurgeon, whose yard is swamped with ash. "I don't think it was intentional, but it upsets me."
Environmental activist groups said this week they worry about the danger to drinking water. Dead fish were seen floating downstream, but the TVA said that could have been caused by freezing temperatures that may have contributed to the dike bursting.
The results of water sampling downstream from the plant indicated the concentrations of toxic contaminants were less than what state standards deem harmful to fish and aquatic life, TVA said in a news release Thursday.
Friday evening, the state Department of Environment and Conservation said samples taken around the local water treatment plant show water entering the facility meets public health standards. A department news release said elevated contaminant levels were present in the immediate area of the spill, but not in the area of any drinking water intake for Kingston Water Treatment Plant.
Environmentalists and the coal industry have argued for years over whether coal ash should be regulated as hazardous waste, which would make it subject to more regulations. In 2000, the EPA backed away from labeling it a hazardous waste but encouraged states to strengthen their regulations.
The New York Times contributed to this report.
-DOCSTART-
The Environmental Protection Agency has approved a plan to stabilize the riverbed near the San Jacinto River Waste Pits Superfund site to address the hazards of a 20,000-square-foot area where Hurricane Harvey gouged a pit about 12 feet deep.
At the same time, the EPA and companies responsible for the cleanup say further inspection and tests indicate that a temporary concrete cap appeared to have held during the storm and therefore a major leak of cancer-causing dioxins was averted at the site of Interstate 10 near Channelview.
The San Jacinto Waste Pits is one of 43 Superfund sites in the coastal areas affected by Hurricane Harvey. It's the only site that required additional followup and repairs, the EPA says. The pits - which hold waste from a former paper mill - were submerged when a wall of water as high as 18 inches above normal levels flooded the river area.
On Sept. 29, the EPA ordered further testing at the Superfund site after a government dive team collected one sediment sample at the pits that tested at 70,000 micrograms per kilogram - 2,000 times higher than the EPA recommended cleanup level of 30 micrograms per kilogram.
But the preliminary results of six additional sediment samples collected from the northwest corner of the site show far lower concentrations of the dioxins, ranging from only 0.02 micrograms per kilogram to 38.9 micrograms per kilogram, according to information provided Thursday to the Chronicle by companies handling the cleanup.
Though one of those newly reported results exceeds the EPA recommended cleanup level, they are similar to levels previously found in river sediments there, the companies say.
An independent Houston-based lab tested the samples, documents show.
"No release of dioxins or furans has occurred from the San Jacinto waste pits site as a result of Hurricane Harvey," the companies claim, based on the new sampling.
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt, who was visiting Houston om Thursday to meet with industry groups, recently announced that his agency is backing a plan to remove the waste pits entirely from the path of the river, partly because of damage caused by Hurricane Harvey. Various Harris County officials, environmental groups, citizen activists and members of Congress all back the proposed $115 million removal plan.
The San Jacinto Waste pits were used into the 1960s to store waste that was taken by barge to the site from a paper mill. The site was originally on the riverbank in eastern Harris County, but over time, subsidence, dredging and construction of the Interstate Highway 10 bridge altered the path of the river and the site became partially submerged.
The pits became a federal Superfund site in 2008 and were capped in 2011 partly in response to fears of damage from hurricanes.
But the companies responsible for the clean-up - McGinnis Industrial Maintenance Corp., Waste Management and International Paper Co. , have said they will oppose a removal plan as too risky for the environment. The companies are likely to use their latest sediment samples to bolster an argument that reinforcing the existing cap is the best way to protect the river, its residents and the Galveston Bay itself.
"In the new sampling results, dioxins and furans were found to be well within the range of concentrations of these toxins measured in sediment in the area prior to Hurricane Harvey and found in background levels generally in the San Jacinto River," the statement says.
However, additional samples of water and sediments are still being tested and preliminary results of the water samples appear to confirm that there was a leak, said Rock Owens, an assistant Harris County attorney, who was briefed on some of the ongoing work Thursday.
Scott Jones, director of advocacy of the Galveston Bay Foundation, argued that the tests were conducted weeks after the storm and that the companies still lack data needed to assure the public whether dioxin escaped or contaminated sediments migrated at the height of the flooding.
He and others also remain concerned about the vulnerability of the cap to future storms.
Jones said he fears the storm likely disturbed "hot spots" of dioxins that already had traveled from the pits into other parts of the ecosystem and been mapped by local researchers from the University of Houston.
"You can try to sample after the fact, but you can't collect what has been released at the time," he said.
-DOCSTART-
Texas is trying to take the federal government to task for failing to find a permanent disposal site for thousands of metric tons of radioactive waste piling up at nuclear reactor sites across the country.
In a lawsuit filed Tuesday night, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton accuses U.S. agencies of violating federal law by failing to license a nuclear waste repository in Nevada — a plan delayed for decades amid a highly politicized fight.
Paxton’s petition asks the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit to force the Nuclear Regulatory Committee to cast an up-or-down vote on the Yucca Mountain plan. It also seeks to prevent the federal Department of Energy from spending billions of dollars in fees collected from utilities to fund a permanent nuclear waste disposal site.
“For decades, the federal government has ignored our growing problem of nuclear waste,” Paxton said in a statement Wednesday. “The NRC’s inaction on licensing Yucca Mountain subjects the public and the environment to potential dangerous risks from radioactive waste. We do not intend to sit quietly anymore.”
Paxton filed the lawsuit just two weeks after former Texas Gov. Rick Perry was sworn in as the agency’s leader. And it comes as Texas’ only radioactive waste site — run by Waste Control Specialists in Andrews County — is asking the NRC to let it temporarily store the nation’s spent nuclear fuel.
About 78,000 metric tons of spent uranium rods are stored at operating or closed reactor sites throughout the country, with 2,610 metric tons in Texas. Those sites, mostly meant to be temporary, are filling up.
Though the nuclear energy industry insists that temporary waste disposal — either in pools or sealed in dry casks of metal or concrete — is safe and environmentally sound, it has long agreed that sealing the waste in geologic formations deep underground boosts protection against terrorist attacks and natural disasters, such as the earthquake and tsunami that rocked Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station in 2011.
For more than 20 years, Washington saw  Yucca Mountain as the solution, and the federal government spent tens of millions of dollars preparing it to accept the waste. But Nevada’s congressional delegation — led by now-retired U.S. Sen. Harry Reid, a Democrat — has thwarted the project. And, facing significant political pressure, President Barack Obama’s administration abandoned the Yucca Mountain plans.
Since 1983, utility ratepayers across the country chipped in billions of dollars to fund a waste repository — including $815 million collected from Texans. With interest, Texans have contributed $1.5 billion to the fund, managed by the Department of Energy.
A 2013 federal appeals court ruling halted the collections, and the fund now has an unspent balance of $40 billion, according to Paxton’s lawsuit, which opens with a comment from Perry during his confirmation hearing as energy secretary:
“My hope of this committee and administration is that we, finally after 35 years of kicking the can for whatever reason, we can start ... moving to temporary or permanent siting of this nuclear waste.”
A Perry spokesman did not immediately respond to an emailed request for comment.
During Perry’s tenure as governor, Texas became home to one of the nation’s few facilities that accept low-level nuclear waste. Since 2012, Waste Control Specialists, a company formerly owned by the late Dallas billionaire and Republican donor Harold Simmons, has disposed of contaminated tools, building materials and protective clothing, among other items, from shuttered reactors and hospitals.
That site in Andrews County grew rapidly during Perry’s final years in office. Over the objection of environmental groups, the company is seeking a license to temporarily store spent reactor fuel — high-level nuclear waste.
If Paxton’s suit does not force President Donald Trump’s administration to restart the Yucca Mountain plans, some observers say the federal government might more closely eye the Andrews County site — a move that would require Congress to change that 1987 law naming Yucca Mountain as the nation’s repository.
Asked whether Paxton’s lawsuit had anything to do with Waste Control Specialists’ expansion plans, Kayleigh Lovvorn, his spokeswoman, said her office had no comment.
Chuck McDonald, a spokesman for Waste Control Specialists, said the company had not yet read the lawsuit, “therefore, we don’t know if it will have an impact on our project or not.”
But he added: “WCS has always been supportive of a permanent repository, and we believe a consolidated interim storage facility is needed as part of an integrated waste management system in the U.S.”
Karen Hadden, executive director of the Sustainable Energy and Economic Development Coalition, a group fighting the Andrews County site’s expansion, agreed with Paxton’s criticism of the Yucca Mountain process — “a waste of money,” she said. But Hadden worries that the lawsuit could force the government to permit a site ill-equipped to protect public health and safety.
“It’s really important that we get a permanent repository in place that will isolate this waste so we don’t have cancer effects or deaths from contamination today or into the future,” Hadden said. “My concern is that [Paxton] has another Texas permanent disposal site in mind.”
-DOCSTART-
PORTLAND — A small level of potentially dangerous chemical substances, popularly known as PFAS, has been detected in a sample from a city of Portland backup groundwater well, which has been used sparingly over the past 20 years.
While the level of PFAS is minimal and does not pose any threat to Portland residents, the city is taking steps to ensure its water quality remains high, said City Manager Tutt Gorman.
“That particular well is off the grid,” Gorman said. “There is no public health threat right now.”
PFAS are described as “a group of industrial chemicals that have been used world-wide in common consumer products and manufacturing processes,” according to the definition from the city’s website.
Two chemicals found in PFAS are perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), and they both have potential health implications for humans if they are found in drinking water at concentrations above health advisory levels.
In late September, a contractor working for the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality collected a water sample from each of the city of Portland’s three groundwater production wells, as well as a standby well, Gorman said. Similar sampling has been conducted throughout the state to test for the presence of PFAS in groundwater.
No PFAS substances were detected in Portland’s three primary wells - labeled PW-4, PW-6 and PW-7 - which provide the city’s drinking water.
In the standby well, PW-5, trace levels (four parts per trillion) were detected, Gorman said. That level is 17 times below the MDEQ standard of 70 parts per trillion.
In response to the sample, the city’s engineering firm, Fleis & VandenBrink, collected a confirmation sample from the standby well, Gorman said. Results from that Nov. 30 sampling reported trace levels of 3.26 parts per trillion.
Since this level of PFAS is below the MDEQ standard, Portland was not required by the state to take any action. However, Gorman said the city is working with its engineering firm to take some steps to address the issue.
PW-5 will remain off-line indefinitely, Gorman said. The standby well was taken out of regular service more than 20 years ago. Since then, it has only been used in emergency and standby situations, the city manager said.
Portland is also developing and implementing testing for PFAS in wastewater that discharges into the city’s wastewater treatment plant, Gorman said. The city is also conducting a study to identify locations for a new community water well.
Gorman informed the Portland City Council of these decisions at a Jan. 7 meeting.
“In light of the new concerns and the highlight on this particular issue, we want to make sure we’re moving forward in a way that’s responsible and as quickly as possible,” Gorman said.
The city is doing its due diligence in making these decisions, Gorman said. He wants to make sure the water is clean for all residents, including his family.
“Clean water is most important to us,” he said. “It’s not just my job, it’s personal.”
-DOCSTART-
PARIS (AP) ” It took a blaze that nearly destroyed Paris’ most famous cathedral to reveal a gap in global safety regulations for lead, a toxic building material found across many historic cities.
After the Notre Dame fire in April spewed dozens of tons of toxic lead-dust into the atmosphere in just a few hours, Paris authorities discovered a problem with the city’s public safety regulations: There was no threshold for them to gauge how dangerous the potentially-deadly pollution was from the dust that settled on the ground.
Since then, The Associated Press has found this regulatory gap extends far beyond France. Officials in other historic European capitals such as Rome and London, as well as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the World Health Organization also have no such outdoor lead dust hazard guidelines.
The reason, they say, is that although there are lead regulations, no one contemplated a conflagration on a lead-laden building the scale of Notre Dame ” whose spire towered nearly 100 meters (330 feet) high.
Poisoning from lead dust can cause permanent loss to cognitive ability, seizures, coma, or death ” and exposure is of greatest risk to pregnant mothers and to young children, who can easily transfer toxic dust into their mouths.
After 250 tons of lead on Notre Dame’s spire and roof was engulfed in flames in central Paris on April 15 and authorities alerted Parisians to an environmental health risk, they were forced to cobble together disparate and incomplete research to set a makeshift safety level in an attempt reassure the public.
‘When the Notre Dame fire happened, we didn’t have any threshold for what represented dangerous lead levels outdoors,’ Anne Souyris, the Paris City Hall deputy mayor in charge of public health, told the AP. ‘It was a wake-up call ... the amount of lead that was burned in Notre Dame was unprecedented.’
Officials were surprised to discover that while safety guidelines exist in France for lead levels inside buildings and schools, as well as in paint, soil and air pollution, there were zero hazard guidelines for lead accumulations in public spaces, such as dust on the ground.
The inherent danger and the regulatory gap for lead dust became impossible to ignore for French officials as it collected as a toxic film on the cobblestones of Paris’ Ile-de-la-Cite following the fire.
‘The authorities basically tried to create safety guidelines after the fire by piecing together a mixture of old fragments of data and reports,’ Souyris said. ‘But there was really nothing official ... we simply didn’t realize that lead outside might be a problem.’
On July 18 ” three months after the inferno ” Paris’ Regional Health Agency (ARS) said it designated 5,000 micrograms per square meter (4,180 mcg per square yard) as a concerning level for lead dust in public spaces. It also acknowledged there was an ‘absence of regulatory thresholds ... regarding the presence of lead in dust deposited on roads.’
AP learned from health officials that this figure was compiled by using incomplete data, including a French Culture Ministry report assessing lead levels in Paris monuments.
Some media outlets reported that registered levels of lead contamination in locations surrounding the fire-damaged cathedral ranged between 500 and 800 times the official safe levels.
But health officials told the AP that Paris still does not have any official regulatory threshold.
The World Health Organization told AP it also has no outdoor safety guidelines for lead dust and has no ‘immediate’ intention to create any.
New legislation for hazard safety in Britain following the 2017 Grenfell Tower fire also did not cover lead-dust hazards. The U.K. Environment Ministry told AP it doesn’t ‘have a specific threshold for unsafe lead dust levels in the U.K. in public places.’ It said the hazard focus after Grenfell, an apartment building constructed in the 1970s, ‘was more on asbestos than lead due to the age of the building.’
In the U.S., where many buildings were constructed after lead hazards were widely recognized, the Environmental Protection Agency has no lead dust hazard standards for outdoor public spaces.
Lead is ubiquitous in Paris’ 19th-century architecture ” in roofs, gilded balconies, floors and terraces ” and not just in its most famous cathedral. In 1853, Napoleon III chose Baron Haussmann to carry out a near-total renovation of Parisian boulevards and parks in an era that used lead prolifically ” designs that still dominate the city.
French officials say there are so few guidelines on lead dust levels because it was not a problem they had to confront until the unprecedented Notre Dame fire.
It took four months for the city to complete a deep-clean operation of the sidewalks even as tourists, residents and merchants walked streets around the cathedral daily.
Paris City Hall issued a new action plan this fall to address lead ” including cleaning and testing in places that host children, increased monitoring of children with high levels of lead in their blood and an independent epidemiological study of lead health impacts in a city that has used the toxic element since the Middle Ages.
‘Paris is a beautifully preserved city,’ Souyris said. ‘But we realize we have also beautifully preserved its lead.’
Experts say Paris’ rare status as a highly conserved historic city makes it a particular danger spot for lead.
‘Preservation does make Paris unusual,’ said Neil M. Donahue, a chemistry professor at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. ‘Incineration of one of the most famous roofs in the world may be especially dramatic, but there is no alchemy in this world. Lead will remain lead forever.’
The fire in Paris’ spiritual heart increased awareness among authorities and the public to the dangers of lead.
In June, Paris’ Regional Health Agency advised that all pregnant women and children under 7 years old living near the site take a test for lead levels.
The agency said 12 children in the surrounding areas tested positive for elevated lead levels in their blood since the fire. None have been hospitalized or prescribed medication, but officials said it was impossible to predict the long-term health consequences of the fire.
One child’s lead exposure came from a source other than the cathedral: the lead balcony of his family’s apartment. But it illustrates how the fire awakened Parisians to the dangers of lead. It’s unlikely the child would have been tested at all without the catastrophe.
Despite the lead fallout from the fire, experts say tourists should not alter travel plans to one of the most visited cities in the world.
But toxic lead dust remains a problem inside the burned-out cathedral, after tons of molten and airborne lead contaminated its interior. The inside clean-up is a delicate and painstaking process, complicated by French President Emmanuel Macron’s five-year timeline for the restoration to be completed ” a deadline many experts say is unrealistic.
Aline Magnien, director of the Historic Monuments Research Laboratory, recently dispatched her team of scientists to figure out how to remove the toxic lead from inside the UNESCO world heritage site, which is over 850 years old, without damaging it.
‘It’s a race against the clock,’ she said. ‘The lead is a real problem. The cathedral is exceptionally precious. And we don’t have the luxury of time.’
-DOCSTART-
An environmental cleanup contractor is working to remove oil from a Monroe County canal at the DTE Energy Fermi 2 nuclear power plant property in Newport.
On 11:15 a.m. Monday, DTE officials discovered an oil sheen in a storm water outfall canal on plant property, said John Austerberry, manager of nuclear communications. The sheen was noticed by a plant technician who was performing a routine inspection.
DTE Energy officials reported the incident to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The oil, estimated to be about five to 10 gallons, was contained in the canal and is being removed by the contractor, Austerberry said.
The oil was traced to a vent on the roof of the plant’s turbine building. The vent is designed to release oil vapor from the turbine’s lubricating system into a capture system.
Storm water drains on the roof of the building carried the oil to the monitored outfall canal.
“This incident will have no impact on the water quality in Lake Erie or Swan Creek,” Austerberry said. “This event will also have no impact on plant safety or plant operations, and the oil did not contain any radioactive material.”
The outfall canal, which empties into Swan Creek, is regularly monitored, officials said.
“Further investigation will be conducted to determine how the small quantity of oil bypassed the collection system,” Austerberry said.
-DOCSTART-
MORENCI — A tractor fire in Morenci became more complex Sunday night it became a hazardous material cleanup operation.
According to Morenci Fire Chief Brad Lonis, emergency personnel were dispatched to a tractor fire at around 8:20 p.m. on Medina Road, near the Morey Highway intersection.
Lonis said that on arrival, they found a large tractor that was fully involved.
“We’re pretty sure the cause of the fire was due to a ruptured fuel tank,” Lonis said, adding that a trail of fuel was seen coming from the area the tractor turned onto Medina Road from Morey Highway.
The tractor was pulling a trailer full of silage, which also caught fire and had stopped underneath power lines.
Firefighters called Consumers Energy to cut power to the lines while they fought the fire.
The fire was put out after about five minutes, but the diesel fuel had leaked out into a ditch at the side of the road and the scene turned into a hazmat situation, with firefighters using absorbent materials on the spill and sandbags to contain it.
“We carry a lot of backing material and booms in our special operations trailer, so we were able to get our booms and pillows down and I called the county for a truck-full of sand to build a dike on each side of the spill,” Lonis said.
Firefighters were successful in preventing the spill from reaching the county drain at the intersection.
A professional cleanup company was contacted by the tractor’s owner.
Lenawee County Emergency Management coordinator Craig Tanis, who was contacted by Lonis from the scene, said there was approximately 100 gallons of diesel fuel that spilled into the ditch. The Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy (EGLE) was also informed of the spill.
Tanis said the cleanup would require the cleanup company to remove the soil where the spill occurred.
“Whatever gets saturated into the ground, usually that dirt has to be totally removed and then hauled out to a landfill that will accept contaminated soil like that,” Tanis said.
“It was one of them calls (where) you went from ... a fire, then you had a potential electrical hazard, then ... our gears switched over to a spill situation. So it was kind of a three-fold call there,” Lonis said. “The guys did a nice job handling and mitigating everything.”
-DOCSTART-
GRAND RAPIDS, MI — A medical device manufacturer is facing $110,000 in fines related to emissions of a cancer-causing chemical from a sterilization facility near downtown.
Viant Medical Inc. will pay the fines under a proposed consent order negotiated with the Michigan Department of Enviroment, Great Lakes and Energy (EGLE), according to pollution enforcement documents.
A public hearing is scheduled next month and EGLE is taking public comment until Oct. 25.
Viant, which operates at 520 Watson St. SW across the river from downtown, sterilizes medical devices using ethylene oxide (EtO). State regulators say the chemical has been escaping the facility at troubling levels through doors and vents as “fugitive emissions.”
Air quality regulators began scrutinizing Viant’s EtO emissions in July 2018 after the chemical was re-classified as a “known carcinogen” based on occupational health studies.
EGLE (formerly the DEQ) issued four pollution violation notices and says computer modeling shows EtO levels in the ambient air at levels high enough to pose a long-term risk. The invisible and odorless gas is known to cause breast and blood cancers, including multiple myeloma, leukemia, Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Disclosure that EtO emissions were found at elevated levels around Viant generated community concern and prompted indoor air testing at the downtown Grand Valley State University Pew Campus. The university said its testing found negligible health risk.
The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services reviewed cancer data for 10 census tracts around the Viant facility on the city’s West Side but did not find increased illness rates. The state said there was limited exposure information from which to draw conclusions.
Last year, the Kent County Health Department folded Viant into an existing West Side cancer review once environmental regulators began escalating an emissions probe at the facility.
According to a 2018 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency national air toxics report developed using 2014 emissions data, downtown Grand Rapids and much of the city’s West Side between I-196 and the Grand River is at elevated cancer risk due to EtO emissions. Viant’s facility is listed as an EtO source under the name Vention Medical.
In Kent County Census Tract 27 (in which Viant’s facility is located), the cancer risk is 118 per million people. In tract 19, the risk is 81 per million. In tract 20, the risk is 87 per million. The national average is 32 per million. (reference map here).
Viant has disputed EGLE data collection and assessment techniques and has argued there are other EtO sources in the area like car exhaust.
Viant will stop sterilizing devices using EtO at the facility by Dec. 31 and stop using EtO there entirely by Jan. 31, 2020 per U.S. Food & Drug Administration requirements, according to EGLE. The company will continue to sample for EtO through February 2020.
The company did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the proposed fine amount, which is the result of negotiations between Viant and EGLE. The money would be paid into the state’s general fund.
A public hearing is scheduled at Grand Valley’s Eberhard Center on Oct. 23 at 7:30 p.m., preceded by an informational session at 5:30 p.m.
-DOCSTART-
MUSKEGON TWP., MI – A sewage spill next to Baker College near Muskegon dumped as much as 132,000 gallons of untreated wastewater into a nearby storm sewer and creek on Tuesday.
The leak in a sewer force main was discovered around 9:30 a.m. Jan. 28 on Quarterline Road south of Marquette Avenue in front of Baker College in Muskegon Township, said Dave Johnson, director of the Muskegon County Wastewater Management System.
The sewage entered a storm drain that dumps into Four Mile Creek, which runs through the campus of nearby Muskegon Community College, Johnson said. The creek was being tested for the presence of E. coli, and a no-contact advisory was expected to be issued, he said.
Municipal workers realized that wastewater was seeping out of a crack in the roadway and Johnson was notified around 10 a.m., he said. The wastewater flowed from the crack – created when the leak lifted up the force main and pavement -- into the nearby storm drain and did not pool on any property, Johnson said.
Further investigation revealed the leak was on the bottom of the pipe, leading officials to pull back somewhat on the initial estimate that 132,500 gallons spilled, Johnson said. He called that estimate very conservative.
Jackson-Merkey Contractors were called in to repair the pipe and roadway. The flow was stopped at 12:05 p.m., though more untreated wastewater spilled from 12:35 p.m. to 1:11 p.m. as workers had to add an additional pump to transfer sewage from a lift station wet well into a tanker, Johnson said.
-DOCSTART-
It's a stinky, nasty-looking, frozen mixture of green and black sludge and has something stringy in it that looks like it could be hair or algae.
It sits bunched up in a long, 2- to 3-foot-high pile along the seawall at Joe Henninger's house, which backs up to Lake St. Clair in Harrison Township.
Henninger watched Tuesday as Sam Madden, an environmentalist with the Macomb County Health Department, took samples of the mystery substance that has been found in large and small amounts up and down the Lake St. Clair shoreline this week. It showed up days after a nearly billion-gallon release of combined sewage overflows into the lake during heavy rains.
"It does stink," Macomb County Public Works Commissioner Candice Miller said, as she watched Madden take the samples for E. coli testing. If there is E. coli, further testing to determine whether it's human or animal are expected, county officials said.
"It's really kinda a funkiness all down the coast," Henninger said. "If it gets into the drinking water, that's a real problem."
Harrison Twp. resident Joe Henninger noticed waves of sludge splashing up onto his break wall last week after heavy rains hit the metro Detroit area. The Macomb County health department took samples Tuesday, Jan. 21, 2020 to test the contents of the material.
But what is the murky, sludgy looking stuff that has landed in residents' yards and on seawalls and where did it come from?
Henninger saw the substance being carried to shore in waves Saturday morning and shot a video from his backyard at his home along Jefferson, south of Shook Road, which was then posted on the Save Lake St. Clair Facebook page.
Henninger, who has lived in his home since 2016, said he saw a black band in the water that looked like feces and a white band that looked like toilet paper.
"It's just really disgusting. We're pumping it into our own drinking water," he said. "You're getting a real picture of what you're drinking."
More than 800 million gallons of treated combined sewer overflows from Macomb and Oakland counties were discharged after heavy rains the weekend of Jan. 11, officials in those counties said. The Save Lake St. Clair Facebook page said the Warren Wastewater Treatment Plant released nearly 40 million gallons of sanitary sewer overflow into the Red Run Drain between Jan. 11 and Jan. 13, which eventually flows into the lake.
But until test results come back, possibly by Thursday afternoon, it's anyone's guess what the substance is.
Macomb County Health Department environmentalist RS Sam Madden collects samples along the Lake St. Clair shoreline Tuesday, Jan. 21, 2020 at Harrison Twp. resident Joe Henninger's home after waves of sludge splashed up onto his break wall last week after heavy rains hit the metro Detroit area. 
Andrew Cox, environmental health director for Macomb County, said he didn't think the situation presents a health emergency, but said "it's a concern."
He said if the material is E. coli, officials would work to collect the material and dispose of it at their cost. If the material is natural from the lake, he said, homeowners would probably be responsible for the cost of cleaning it up from their properties.
Oakland County Water Resources Commissioner Jim Nash said the released water from Oakland County was treated and screened and "we're producing the safest water we can under that permit." He said the combined sewer overflow couldn't have contributed to what residents in Macomb County saw this past weekend.
Nash said it's his understanding, from experts he talked with, that the material is lake turnover — vegetation that dies off, starts rotting and floats and during a normal winter isn't seen because of ice on the water. Nash said there may be some animal and human DNA in the material.
"Lake St. Clair is the highest it's ever been in 100 years or more. People see it in their yards where they never saw it before," he said. "This has nothing to do with any sewage releases. It's really how a lake works. ... That's my understanding."
Macomb County's Miller doesn't know what the substance is, but said officials have got to work to eliminate any contamination getting into the lake.
She pointed to the city of Warren, which is spending $52 million to build a detention basin. She's trying to get a permit from the state to expand and upgrade the Chapaton Retention Basin in St. Clair Shores to help reduce combined sewer overflows.
But, Miller said, the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy EGLE has not yet issued the permit to allow the expansion to occur.
Harrison Twp. resident Joe Henninger speaks to Macomb County Public Works Commissioner Candace Miller about waves of sludge splashing up onto his break wall last week after heavy rains hit the metro Detroit area. The Macomb County health department took samples Tuesday, Jan. 21, 2020 to test the contents of the material.
Michael Gutow, founder of the Save Lake St. Clair Facebook page, said adding detention basins or capacity is better than nothing, but during massive rainstorms there will still be combined sewer overflows.
To truly fix the problem, he said, officials need to separate the storm water and sanitary sewers in the older communities where they are not separated.
But that very expensive.
For example, Miller said that for Eastpointe and 20% of St. Clair Shores to separate its underground systems, it would cost $350 million. She's trying to make improvements to the flows coming from these two areas by expanding capacity at the Chapaton basin, which is a $30 million project.
Gutow, of St. Clair Shores, said he'll be the first to admit that what residents are seeing along the shoreline this week is not all sewage. He believes there is normal lake debris and algae, too, "however, there is human waste mixed in there as well."
"It's a whole mixture — one big soup pot of all that stuff comin' in there," he said.
Gutow said he believes it's not up to the homeowners to be responsible for cleaning this up — it's up to the counties that are discharging.
Gutow said he would like the public to be alerted when the area is expected to receive 1 inch or more of rain so residents can limit water usage to prevent sewage getting into the lake or backing up into basements.
Doug Martz, who was chairman of Macomb County's former water quality board, also said that separating the underground systems is what is needed.
Martz, who has been fighting pollution for more than two decades, said he thinks the material is a combination of what was released from the communities and sediment in the bottom of the Clinton River spillway and the lake.
"We've gotta stop this," he said. "We've gotta separate."
-DOCSTART-
It was no merry splash of holiday color when a bright-green liquid gushed from a freeway wall onto I-696 during Friday’s rush hour in Madison Heights. 
The green gusher backed up thousands of motorists, requiring first a one-lane closure, then two lanes on eastbound I-696 just before Dequindre — likely to last at least through this week. Yet those were comparatively minor problems.
Far more worrisome has been deciding what’s in this grinchy gift, how much area did it contaminate, and why wasn’t this gusher choked off last year when the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency spent $1.5 million cleaning up the source of the pollution.
According to a state of Michigan official at the site Monday, last year’s clean-up removed the “imminent threat” to health and safety. But investigators didn’t figure on the basement of the factory gradually becoming a hidden reservoir of contaminated liquid, growing with rain and groundwater to become a small geyser seeking an outlet.
The source is a defunct metal-plating firm, sitting on the service drive above the freeway. Its owner must report to federal prison by mid-January after pleading guilty Nov. 6 to pollution violations.
In the lengthy investigation that led to the arrest of Gary Sayers, state and federal officials declared that the factory Sayers inherited from his father was a Superfund site, and the clean-up took nearly a year.
The building from which hexavalent chromium-contaminated groundwater leaked onto I-696. Photographed in Madison Heights, Monday, Dec. 23, 2019. While the liquid is now cleaned up, there is now an absorbent material at the base of the spill.
Yet over the weekend, emergency crews pumped thousands of gallons of the sickly green liquid from beneath Sayers’ former factory. And then, environmental experts issued a dire early analysis: the green liquid likely was groundwater contaminated with highly toxic hexavalent chromium, also known as chromium-6.
It’s the same chemical that a giant California utility let contaminate drinking water, according to a lawsuit brought by activist Erin Brockovich, whose David-versus-Goliath battle became a movie in 2000 starring Julia Roberts.
“You don’t want to touch it – you don’t want to go in that building,” said EPA investigator Tricia Edwards, at the site on Monday. 
She was one of dozens of state and federal workers who canceled holiday vacation plans to pounce on a site they thought was safe. Although the green gusher posed no immediate risk to the public, largely because no one for miles around gets water from a well, investigators said the return of obvious contamination at the site was a shocking disappointment.
Sayers could not be reached Monday. He was at the site of his defunct business on Friday night, signing a release so that a pollution clean-up crew could enter his property, a state environmental spokeswoman said. 
Paul Tamm, who co-owns Tam-Kor Engineering across the street, said he'd known Sayers for years, considers him a friend and that "he's not a criminal -- he's just eccentric."
But while patrons like Ray Frawely of Hazel Park at nearby Max Dugan's Bar were joking about naming a new drink “green slime,” state and federal pollution investigators were trying to assess how the spill had erupted.
In the basement of the former Electro-Plating Services, “Gary Sayers hand dug a pit -- he told me himself,” recalled Tracy Kecskemeti, district coordinator in Southeast Michigan for the state’s newly renamed environmental agency – the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (EGLE). Kecskemeti interviewed Sayers as part of the state and federal investigations into his pollution violations. He was sentenced in November to a year in federal prison.
The pit was roughly 10-by-10 feet and “five or six feet deep,” Kecskemeti said Monday. Its bottom? Just dirt.
“And while he was operating there, for many years I believe, he had all of the liquid waste flowing into that pit. Every so often, he would pump out that pit into a tank, filter it and run it into the city sewers,” she said.
During the EPA’s clean-up, the pit was fully emptied, as were every tank, vat, barrel and can of dangerous chemicals in the factory. Then clean-up contractors filled the pit with gravel to stabilize it.
This photo provided by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality showed conditions in 2017 inside Electro-Plating Service on 10 Mile Road in Madison Heights, which has since been cleaned up as an EPA Superfund site.
But Kecskemeti now says it must have gradually filled with water, which leached into the pit from above the clay layer underground, and also likely flowed into the factory’s basement from rain coming through holes in the deteriorating roof. The water mixed with pollution residues embedded in the earth around the pit, turning it green.
In 2017-18, the EPA clean-up was conducted as a “removal” of “imminent threat” to health and safety, but once it was done, the site was turned over to state pollution experts to decide whether more money and effort was needed for “remediation,” Kecskemeti said.
The initial $1.5 million “was not intended to clean up everything,” she said, adding: “We knew there was contamination in the soil," which would need to be addressed eventually; but because there was no threat to drinking water or otherwise threaten public health, "the site did not meet the criteria for a Superfund listing."
“What this incident shows us is that we didn’t have a full sense of what was underground,” she said. As water accumulated in the basement pit, pressure built up and suddenly, perhaps through some fissure in the soil, a subterranean stream of green began pushing out from under the old factory.
Download the Detroit Free Press app for the latest breaking news, notifications, sports scores, weather updates and more!
It may have found low resistance in the sand and gravel underlying the adjoining freeway service drive, then reached the perfect route into the freeway – a trench filled with pea gravel that carried an electrical conduit to the side of the freeway, for the convenience of MDOT work crews needing to illuminate temporary signs.
“Right where that conduit comes out of the wall” is where the green gusher erupted, Kecskemeti said. 
The EPA expects to know by Friday just what the liquid contains, state and EPA officials said. According to a news release from EGLE, “there is no immediate threat to air quality or drinking water from this release (and) there are no nearby drinking water wells that would be affected from contaminated groundwater."
The shoulder and lanes of I-696 were closed to prevent motorists from driving through the material, although the former gusher is little more than seepage now, and workers have spread absorbent material on the freeway shoulder, according to state and EPA officials.
Construction and cleanup at the site of a chemical spill on I-696 in Madison Heights, Monday, Dec. 23, 2019. While the liquid is now cleaned up, there is now an absorbent material at the base of the spill.
Unfortunately, hundreds and perhaps thousands of gallons of the contaminated green liquid probably ran into storm sewers and, ultimately, Lake St. Clair before clean-up crews arrived late Friday night. Macomb County Public Works Commissioner Candice Miller commended the quick response by state and federal agencies while also saying that the incident points out the need for a coordinated monitoring plan to protect Great Lakes water.
“Michigan EGLE and EPA were quickly on the job and engaged in this clean-up on what was essentially a holiday weekend," Miller said. She called for the capture and treatment of all pollution that runs into storm drains on major freeways.
“A single drop of this chromium-6 contamination that might enter the lake is one drop too much,” she said.
Madison Heights Mayor Brian Hartwell said his city has wrestled with Sayers for years over the hazards at his company, hamstrung by laws that he said seem overly protective of polluters.
"It's our opinion that sites like this just be removed. But this business owner is contesting that in court. In fact, we are due to start a trial with him in mid-January," Hartwell said.
"I am actually relieved by the response to this from all levels of government. EPA has been very responsive. The state has been. But there should be more funding available for preventing this type of problem," Hartwell said.